Okay, we're rolling. First of all, I just wondered if you might tell us a little
bit about how you, the origin of a column in Locus, if you like. Well, about
two, two and a half years ago, I was invited to address a group of authors, the
American Society of Journalists and Authors, and I chose to talk to them about
certain contractual clauses that I thought might be pitfalls in most
professional authors. In the questioning that followed, I found an appalling
ignorance on the part of authors on the subject of contracts, and many of these
people are highly respected professional journalists and book authors, and yet
it was clear to me that they didn't know anything, or very much, I should say,
about how to read a contract, how to negotiate one, and how to alter a clause to
their own benefit. And so I decided to write a column for the many other writers
who probably are in the same position. And I asked Charles Brown, the editor of
Locus, the publisher of Locus, I guess, whether he'd be interested in publishing
it, and he was quite agreeable. And thereafter, a number of magazines,
newsletters published by other writers groups, such as Western Writers of
America, Romance Writers of America, Mystery Writers of America, took on the
column because they felt the authors were in the same position. So actually,
Locus, then, was your first magazine of that type that you wrote the column for?
Yes. Locus was, I still consider myself as writing the column for Locus. Okay,
fine. Would you be allowed to tell me which science fiction authors or just some
of them that you do represent? Well, no, I don't mind at all. It's, I think, a
fairly common knowledge in the science fiction community. We represent Harlan
Ellison, Gregory Benford, Greg Bear, Elizabeth Lynn, Marta Randall, Barry
Longyear, Warren Norwood, Jessica Salmonson, and I'd say three or four more.
Okay. If you had to sell a decent manuscript by an unknown author, would you
prefer to work with a romance, a western, a mystery, a science fiction, or what
sort of genre literature? Well, I, my orientation has always been the paperback
original market. Not that my agency doesn't handle hard covers. We handle quite
a lot of them. dozens and dozens hard covers, and many have been on the
bestseller list and book club selections and so forth. But the, the, really, the
blood of the industry is the paperback market. And the paperback market does
break down into some fairly convenient genres. and agents, I guess, are a little
bit like nomads in that they follow the, the source of, of life. And, in this
case, for instance, the hot market right now is the contemporary romances. And
so we have a very active department in, in the contemporary romances. Science
fiction is, has become somewhat soft since the Star Trek, Star Wars phenomenon.
And, although it's still a very active market, we have noticed a kind of sorting
out of, of important writers from what they call the mid-list writers. That is
to say, those writers who aren't quite of the blockbuster or best-seller
category, and yet they, they're, they're better than what some people might
refer to as, you know, as hacked writers. They find themselves in a, in a market
where there really isn't an audience anymore. So we have found that
writers are really, have to choose between going to something else or becoming
stars in the science fiction market. There's no middle ground anymore. And
that's true of just about all the genres. Westerns, romance, maybe the, the
most, the place that is most open for new writers, inexperienced writers. But in
the science fiction world, I think you, you must start with some advantage or
you're going to have a tough struggle ahead of you. I think we've never spoken
to an agent before and there's always, from your perspective, I think you can
answer certain questions that I think anybody else would have difficulty
answering. And one of them I wanted to ask you is, from your perspective, what
determines the popularity of a genre of literature in paperback? Is it the
publishers who create the taste or what causes? It's hard to say. Sometimes it's
the publishers create the taste and sometimes the market, the consumer, creates
the demand. And sometimes it's the agent. For instance, I find myself very often
in speaking to publishers, I find myself in a double role. I keep my ears open
and try to listen to what a publisher tells me about what he's able to sell and
what he's not able to sell. And so I have a kind of passive role in that I pass
along to authors what the publishers tell me the market is doing. However, if I
begin to notice a trend, I then try to help create a market by turning to other
publishers and saying, listen, I've had lunch the last couple of months with
four publishers and they all tell me that hard science fiction is not as active
as fantasy in swords and sorcery and so maybe you'd be interested in some swords
and sorcery. So an agent is in the position of shaping the market once he begins
to detect the trend.
Okay, that was interesting. I guess after reading your columns, of course, I'm
coming to understand how much influence an agent can have. I don't think I
realized that before.
Okay, I think I know the answer to this. In fact, most of the questions I'm
asking you, I have some idea of what you'll say because of what I've read of
your work, but I still need to ask it. I know that you have different contracts
for different clients or different authors, but say a contract was any sort of
author, not just science fiction, is it dependent upon if an author is new or
established according to what kind of contract you get? Well, I think authors
and agents probably ought to try to penetrate through a lot of the haze that
surrounds contractual negotiations and realize that the essential in a
contractual negotiation is who has the power. for the beginning author, the
first author, or the author of some work from minor markets, the power
definitely rests for the publisher, with the publisher. The publisher, the
author, in effect, is saying to the publisher, I will sign anything you hand me
if you publish me. and the publisher says, well, I'm glad to hear that because
if you don't like our terms, we'll find somebody else to write for us. Now,
obviously, the power in that equation lies with the publisher. However, as an
author begins to develop, he has a following, his books begin to sell, the
prices that he gets for his work begin to escalate, he may have a bestseller, he
now has other publishers interested in publishing him, and now the equation is
on the other foot, if I may make some metaphor. And it's now the author who
says, the publisher says, I will do anything to keep you, and the author says,
well, then you'd better meet my terms because there are plenty of publishers out
there who will publish me if you don't like what I have, the terms that I'm
ready to dictate. So, when you get down to it, it's raw power, and the agent
tries to put himself in those power vectors, I guess you would say, and get some
sense of where they converge, and that's the point at which a contract
materializes. A contract is a direct reflection of the power flow between the
two parties, and at the points where they all interface, that is what a contract
reads. That's excellent. Very good. You talk just like you write, I think. I'm
not sure that's good or bad. Listen, what the, science fiction fans are, I
think, more fanatic than other types, and a lot of them, of course, are
interested in writing and doing something besides just reading it. if somebody
had a reasonable amount of talent, what would you advise an aspiring science
fiction author? Where should he begin? Always begin with the magazines. You're
absolutely right about science fiction fans being more fanatic, but they are
also fortunate in having a place where they can begin in the shorter media where
most writers in other genres don't have the chance. I mean, there are very few
places where a romance writer can teethe. You know, you can't write romance
short stories unless you write for, try to write for some of the slicker women's
magazines, and they're, of course, very demanding in what they accept. There
used to be Western magazines, many, many of them, but those, almost all of them,
are gone now. Mystery magazines are still a couple of them, but it's not like
what it used to be when I got into the business about 25 years ago. So, one of
the few remaining genres that invites new talent and cultivates it is science
fiction where you have very active magazine market and anthology market for
original stories. you also have conventions. Of course, Western writers, romance
writers, mystery writers also have their conventions, but certainly science
fiction writers can out-convention anybody by a ratio of 10 to 1. So there's a
lot of interplay
where authors are always talking to one another, meeting editors, meeting
professional writers, and there's a much tighter unity than there is in any
other genre. So, I would definitely advise any aspiring science fiction writer
to start writing in the magazines. In fact, even some of my well-known clients,
I still tell them to continue writing for science fiction magazines even though
they may get peanuts for their work compared to what they can get writing books
because the exposure among both science fiction editors and science fiction fans
is terribly important.
Okay, I just have about one or two more on science fiction and get on to some
more general things. Would you happen to be working with any unpublished authors
at present in science fiction that we might look for? That question kind of
catches me unaware. We have a number of people that we're, you know, we are
establishing. It's very hard to say because in spite of what I said a few
moments ago about getting published in magazines, like most other agents, we
handle very little by way of short fiction. It's not profitable for an agent to
handle science fiction stories and there's very little that we can do for a
short story writer that he or she can't do for him or herself. So by the time an
author comes to us asking for representation and we think that person might be
interesting, he's probably had quite a number of stories published in the
science fiction magazines. I will mention one, one author that I think is
enormously talented and will probably burst on the scenes within the next couple
of years and that's a writer named Dan Simmons who's beginning to make some
appearances in Omni and some of the other magazines. He's a very, very talented
writer and we are about to take on some of his longer work. Okay, one more. in
science fiction.
The author of Timescape, which was the Nebula Award winner in the novel category
for 1981, has two novels coming out in the next year. One is Against Infinity,
which is coming out in April, will be published by Timescape Books in hardcover,
a wonderful novel. And I believe next February, we will see Across the Sea of
Suns, which is the sequel to In the Ocean of Night and is the second novel in a
trilogy. We also have what I consider a great novel in the making by Richard
Grant, who's made some appearances in magazines, but turned in a spectacular
novel, which is now being shaped somewhat and redone, but it's some of the most
brilliant writing I've ever read, and those who have had an early look at it
agree with me that it's a very impressive job, and I know that when that book is
finished, I believe it's got bestseller written all over it. Okay, do you like
trilogies? Yes, I like them and I encourage them. I feel they're a very
comfortable form for science fiction writers, in fact, for non-science fiction
writers as well.
The beauty of a trilogy, of course, is, from an ancient viewpoint, is in the
kind of package deal that one can make where you not only sign an author up for
a book, but you can sign him up for a sequel and a sequel after that, and the
author knows where he's going to be two years from now. The publisher knows what
he can expect over a couple of years, and unless the author one day runs out of
steam or gets bored with characters that he developed in book one or two, you
can see a cumulative effect in the sales of a trilogy where publication of book
two makes people scurry for book one, and publication of book three causes the
publisher to reissue books one and two, and then they put them in a box set, and
they're reviewed as a whole. It's a very nice way of publishing books, but not
everybody has a sequel in them. Right. Why does an author with reasonable talent
need an agent?
There are very few authors who, once they achieve publication, are really able
or even want to handle their own business. until you become a full-blooded
professional writer with a track record. As I said before, most of your job is
writing your magazine stuff, sending it out, and developing a magazine market.
But once you begin selling, unless you really understand contractual language,
then you're going to need an agent to interpret it for you. Also, most authors
are not as objective about their work as an agent can be, and therefore they
either demand too much or too little when they negotiate a contract. So an agent
can help put things in perspective and can talk both publishers and authors into
being reasonable. agents can also exploit subsidiary rights that authors are
only dimly aware of. And agents finally are able to help build an author's
career by spotting that author's strengths and weaknesses and building, of
course, on the strengths and developing their talents to the utmost. There are a
few authors I know, most notably Isaac Asimov, who I don't believe have agents
or at least not regular agents. And Isaac certainly has done okay for himself,
although I think there are probably five dozen agents who have said to him,
think how well you would have done if you'd have an agent. But most authors
sooner or later feel that it is well worth the commission and other things to
have somebody, particularly when you're not, when you don't live in the New York
area, which is the heart of the publishing world. You live in California or
Nebraska or something like that. There's nothing so frightening as to be out of
touch with a publisher and not having anybody that you can call to act on your
behalf. Okay, a more personal question. Your book, How to Be Your Own Literary
Agent, of course I haven't seen that yet, but are you trying to put yourself out
of business with that? I don't think I will for the reasons that I just told
you. The title may not be exactly accurate because although it is designed to
help new authors get a foot in the door that they might not otherwise have, it's
also aimed at the professional author who may have an agent who may be of the
kind who simply signs on the dotted line when his agent sticks a contract under
his nose. And those authors, I think, are usually the ones who end up
discovering a couple of years down the road that they made a horrible mistake
when they signed that contract and why didn't their agent tell them about
certain things. And so my feeling is that an enlightened author is probably an
agent's best friend, whether he's represented by an agent or not. The more that
an author knows about contracts and related subjects, the tougher he's going to
be in dealing with publishers and the more he's going to benefit the entire
fraternity and sorority of authors in this country and make an agent's job
easier. So I don't feel that I've contradicted myself by publishing a book
called How to Be Your Own Literary Agent. Okay, as the title indicates then,
that really is a how-to book. Well, it does tell you, for instance, if you're a
new author, it tells you what genres are the rightliest ones to buy your work,
how to write for them, how to package your work for them, how to get your work
on the desk of an editor, and avoid the so-called flush pile, tells you what to
do if you should get an author, tells you how to negotiate on your own, it tells
you how to oversee what your agent is doing if you should decide to turn your
work over to an agent, it tells you how to hire and fire an agent, and it
completely analyzes publishing contracts from start to finish and interprets
each clause in a way that any author can certainly get an advantage by studying
my suggestions.
So really, I guess even a beginner would get some good out of the book.
Absolutely. Okay, good. And when will I be out again? Let's see, today is the
15th. Three days is the official publication date. February 18th. Okay, very
good. It's already created something of a controversy in New York because one of
the chapters in the book is a somewhat outspoken attack on publishing accounting
systems. publishers have a tendency to do what I call creative accounting, which
the bottom line is that they hold, hide, or misguide authors as to how much
royalties they're entitled to. And a couple of days ago, the New York Times
picked up on that chapter and published an article under the headline, Agent
Says Publishers Are Cheating Authors. So we've got what I consider a very
healthy controversy going and certainly one that every author ought to be
interested in because it really is the gut issue. I know many new authors and
aspiring authors, all they want to know is who's going to publish my book and
whatever they pay me, whatever advance I get is fine with me. But as they become
more and more professional and experienced, they may wake up one day and realize
that they're not getting everything that's owing to them because the publishers
have obscured some of the loyalty reporting systems that would enable an author
to get his full due. And so I've tried to dispel some of the mystery around the
reading of royalty statements so publishers, the authors can get a better idea
of what is being told to them and whether any money is being hidden. Okay, in
reading your columns over a period of time, I think I've caught you saying a
couple times that even with a lot of talent and even with a great manuscript,
writers still may not make it because of the way the publishing industry is set
up. Is that sort of a cynical attitude on your part? Well, I don't say it with
any pride. I say it with a great deal of sadness.
many, in the last couple of years, the prices of books have gone prohibitively
high. A hardcover novel these days sells for anywhere from $15 to $20. And a
paperback novel sells anywhere from $3 to $5 or even a little more. And the
consumer, the book buyer, is shying away from the marketplace now because he
seems to feel there are better ways to spend $20 or $5 even. As a result, the
book sales have been dropping and the publishers have become more and more
selective as to what they buy. Unfortunately, that all gets passed down to the
author. And more and more frequently in the last couple of years, I've had to
turn away, as all my colleagues in the agency business have had to do, I've had
to turn away a number of very good books that were well-written but didn't
really fit into certain categories that are, that I know are actively buying.
And so, what you end up with is a well-written book that really isn't saleable.
And, you know, it's, it can often break your heart to send a book like that
back. It doesn't hurt you as much to send back a bad book as it does to send
back a good one. But there's nothing guaranteeing that a good book is going to
sell. And that, I would say, is possibly the major difference between publishing
today and publishing 10 years ago. Okay, one more follow-up on that. Is the
system, or does the system as you describe it, lead to sort of hack writing, or
writing that's not very good? No, quite the contrary. I think the level of
writing is getting better because publishers don't need to publish hack writing
anymore when they can get so many good writers. The market has shrunk. For
instance, the paperback field, whereas about two or three years ago, there were,
I would say, 13 active, viable paperbacks ranging from the modest-sized ones to
the giants. Several have gone out of business, and three or four more have been
absorbed into other companies. And now one can count six or seven paperback
publishers left. And so the, you know, the clamor to be published by those
houses is increasing. And so the publishers can afford to be more selective than
ever before. So my feeling is that the, although I don't like to use the word
hack, that certainly the inferior writer is either going to have to try harder
or he's going to drop out because there are just too many good writers waiting
to take his place. Okay, Mr. Curtis, I have about, I want to move, I have about
10 minutes left if you can spare that. I wanted to talk about some personal
things about your background and your own work if you have the time for that.
Absolutely. Okay. I was going to say how does one become an agent, but I guess I
better ask how you became one. Well, when I, I think for a long time, I always
wanted to be a writer. And when I got out of college, I discovered that there
were no real jobs for writers. So I decided to get into a related field,
publishing. Could not find a job at a publishing company. So I finally ended up
working for a leading literary agency, Scott Merida. And there I stayed for some
seven or eight years. years. And that was my apprenticeship. And after, after
some seven years, I really did have an itch to write. And so I, I had been
writing even while I worked for Scott Merida. So I left that firm and became a
freelance writer. And of course, having been an agent, I was much better
connected than most freelance writers could ever hope to be. So the transition
was not as hard for me as it would be if somebody left some other job. I did a
lot of magazine work, but eventually realized that the magazine market was in
its twilight and began focusing on books. I wrote a lot of paperback novels and
then eventually got into such areas as collaboration, books on conservation. I
found that I had a forte in the area of humor. So I did a number of satirical
books. I wrote just about anything that people would pay money for. And it was a
very, very good grounding. And after about five years of that, a number of my
old clients looked me up and asked me if I would represent them. And since I was
not making a fortune as a writer, in spite of the fact that to date I've had
about 45 books published, I decided that perhaps I would go back into agenting.
And I started my own firm. And for two or three years, I was both a writer and a
literary agent. And literally, I had two desks back to back with a swivel chair
between them. And in the morning, I would do one thing. And in the afternoon, I
would do another. And I would try not to let one contaminate the other. And
eventually, when I discovered that I could make more money on a few phone calls
as an agent than I could for four or five months writing books, it was pretty
clear to me where my career was heading. But I have not given up my writing. The
column, of course, is very satisfying. And from time to time, I might take a
crack at a commercial novel or nonfiction book. I get up at five or six in the
morning. I'll write for an hour or so. Then I'll go to work. And although an
hour a day may not seem like a lot, as most professional writers will tell you,
over a period of a couple of months, one can write a book at an hour a day as
long as you stay with it and turn out something every day. So I do consider
myself a literary agent with a side order of writing.
In looking over the books that I know you've written in the past few years, it
seems to me that a lot of your nonfiction books have been dealing with issues of
social concern, like the nuclear lessons, the inequality in American
communities, and so forth. Is that because of personal taste or because of your
collaborators? Well, I take some pride in some of the work that I've done in the
area of conservation.
Around 1970 or so, I was approached by a woman who had accumulated a great deal
of quite terrifying information about the nuclear power industry. And she asked
me to collaborate with her. I knew very little about it. But I did work with
her. And out of that collaboration came a book that was published by Doubleday
called Perils of the Peaceful Atom. It was the first popular book on the dangers
of nuclear power plants. And although it was supplanted later on by books
published by people, authorities, scientists, and PhDs, whereas we were only
laymen and women, I like to think that that book did open the door to discussion
of the nuclear power issues, which finally culminated in the Three Mile Island
accident years later. And I was able to say that I had told you so. Many of the
things that happened were predicted in that book years earlier. And of course,
nobody really wanted to listen. So I have written some other books of social
value, and I'm very proud of them. I'm also, if I may add, very proud as an
agent to have brought into the world many books on social issues and things like
that. We recently handled a magnificent first novel about the Vietnam War called
The Thirteenth Valley, which went on the bestseller list, and opened the door to
what I know will now be a state of Vietnam fiction. Up until that time, people
had said that nobody really wanted to read about Vietnam. And so we've now
enabled some fresh air to blow into the marketplace with that novel. And again,
this is an accomplishment that I'm very proud of.
What about your fiction, your novels? Could you give me an idea of what kind of
things you write about and if they sell well? Well, a couple years ago, while I
was still full, well, more than that, about a decade ago, I conceived
a paperback series featuring a hero that I always thought was rather unusual. He
was a detective in the area of sports. And a series of books featuring this hero
was, the series was called The Pro. And the books were published by Warner. We
did four of those. And at the moment, I'm trying to revive that series or
something along those lines because right now, although there's a great deal of
male action adventure fiction being published, everybody's getting bored with
the same old heroes, the mercenaries, the dirty dozens, and series like that.
And so I'm trying to get revived this hero that I think is a rather refreshing
one. But I'm not able to do too much in the fiction area simply because of time.
Okay, I just have a couple more here. I remember reading one of your columns
where you mentioned, I guess it was an innovation on your part as an agent,
where you contracted with a publicity firm for your clients and so forth. I
wondered if things like that that you've done for your clients, it might be a
little different or innovative or whatever. Well, every agent, of course, is
trying to seek a better way to handle his clients and more advantages for his
clients. And one of the things that upsets me deeply is the fact that publishers
are very reluctant to spend promotional money on any authors except the big name
celebrity authors. And so I attempted a couple of years ago to rectify that by
asking my clients, in effect, to chip in. Each one of them would be, in effect,
taxed a couple of extra percentage points of commission. And that tax would go
towards a fund, which we used to hire a publicity agent who would publicize the
little guy. And some of the campaigns were quite successful. Some aspects of the
campaign were not so successful. And it was because of the inconsistency of the
results that we finally dropped the program. But some of it has had lasting
results. And it certainly created a lot of talk in the industry and among
authors. And it was, I thought, a noble experiment in the area of getting the
lesser-known authors publicized. But it's still difficult. The market inclines
towards the big name. And the struggle to become a big name is extremely
intense. And very, very few people emerge.
Okay. What about movie deals for books that are worthy of it? Do you actively
seek them out? Or do movie houses come to you? Well, it's a combination. Most
books that are published that are of any value at all are covered by the movie
studios, producers, and the people in New York whose job it is to scout on
behalf of various Hollywood interests. So the chances are that if an agent is
handling a good book at all, it will have been seen in one way or another by
producers, directors, studio people, and so forth. They have amazing ways of
getting hold of manuscripts, no matter how secretive you try to be. And so long
before you're ready to show them, they've already been exposed. Nevertheless, if
we get a hot manuscript that we really think is going to make a terrific book,
we actively try to find a movie producer for it. And so sometimes the deals come
to us, and sometimes we generate them.
Okay. That's about – I mean, there's lots of questions. I could keep on talking
for a long time, but I think we have enough, and we've taken enough of your
time. But listen, is there anything I haven't asked that you think listeners
should know, or anything at all that you'd like to talk about? We still have
some tape left.
No, I'll be happy to answer any other questions you may have. I will say that we
were talking about innovations before. I may be springing a very radical
proposition on the publishing industry that I believe will create a lot of talk
and controversy, and I'm not doing it just to publicize myself. But I've begun
to – because of my deep concern about royalty accounting and how publishers have
managed to manipulate and hide authors'
royalties, I'm going to be making a proposal to the publishing industry about a
radically different way of accounting royalties based not on sales but on copies
printed. And I would say that within the next few months, you might begin
looking for some stirring in that area. And I believe it could have some rather
radical effects on the way people think about the traditional way of accounting
royalties. Yeah, I remember some of your calls, I think you sort of hinted at
certain things about the way the publishers did that. Right. Well, I actually do
suggest something like it in my book, but I will now be amplifying on it. And if
I can get some of the publishing media to pick up on these suggestions, it
should make for a very, very lively dialogue, and certainly one that's well
overdue in this 18th century business we call publishing. I take it then in the
– let's say the three-part relationship here, a writer, an agent, and a
publisher, that you would say probably the publisher has much the best of it?
No, I don't think so at all. I've heard everybody accuse everybody else of
having the best of it. There are rich agents. There are agents who are
struggling. There are rich authors and authors who are struggling, and there are
rich publishers and there are publishers who are struggling. I, in spite of some
of the belligerent things I may have said, I have a great, great many friends
among the publishers, and I want to see them do well. And so I've come to think
of it as a symbiotic environment in which everybody really does depend on
everybody else. And an agent's job is not just to negotiate contracts, but to
negotiate interest so that nobody gets so badly hurt that he can't carry on. I
mean, publishers are always complaining about their overhead, and it's well to
remind them that agents have to pay their rent also. But some agents get very
greedy, and they feel that the only way for an author to become famous is to pin
the publisher to the wall with a cruel deal. And sometimes that can backfire in
terms of how much money is left after you've hit a publisher that hard, how much
money is left for the struggling author. The paperback publisher that
consistently pays $2 or $3 million for one or two authors is going to find
himself neglecting the new author because he can't afford to pay him. Or if he
should buy a new author's work, he won't have any money left to publicize or
promote that author's book. So there's something even to be said for not being
greedy on behalf of your authors and giving the publisher an even break. Okay,
very good. Okay, listen, we're going to turn off the recorder now. We're just
out of tape. Thank you.